How to setup your own SOCKS5 proxy server?
To make a long story short: use this script 
But you have some time you can read this article in order to gain better understanding of it's guts… ok… let's say inner world :)
There are some cases in life when you want to achieve anonymity, security, hide your ip address and stay incognito.
VPN or SOCKS proxy can help you with this task.
VPN is a popular service but it costs money to use it in general. You buy subscription on your smartphone or
on the website that provides VPN services. Also there is an option of your personal VPN server deployment.
But really not so many people have the expertise and knowledge to do it by himself.
Moreover, VPN is a good solution that can give you anonymity and encrypt traffic between your local workstation 
and the destination server, but it's heavy and initially was not designed just to be a method of anonymity provisioning.
VPN was created in order to reach just one target - creation of virtual overlay network in order to stimulate physical network
environment. And that's it. For instance you can can connect to remote network using VPN and work with this network as if it
way the physical network in your organization. Good example is - your workstation at home and your network inside the office.
When you work from home, most probably you will use a VPN client in order to connect to your work environment in the office.
In other cases you will not have access to the resources that you can use on your work e.g. intranet / mail / time tracker / tickets management system /etc. So VPN technology was initially designed for anonymity. It was designed for virtual networks creation.
I hope that now it is clear why VPN is not the best solution for the proxy server.
Another possible option is to use special proxy server software. And deploy this software on your server. One of the examples of such software
is Squid. But Squid is heavy, it requires installation and not so easy to configure even for the experienced system administrators. 
That is why I prefer not to have any mess with such software, however I have had successful experience of its configuration and even tuning.
Third option is utilization of SSH tunneling mechanism that is already available by default for almost all *nix and BSD servers. 
For instance Debian, Ubuntu, MacOS, OpenBSD and FreeBSD.
Special script was created by me right for this purpose:
https://github.com/ksukhorukov/SOCKS
This script automates installment of all necessary software like UFW firewall and helps you to deploy your own SOCKS5 server within a fraction of a minute.
It utilize just one command behind the scene:
ssh -g -f -N -D $SOCKS_PORT $EXTERNAL_IP
This command is able to transform just a regular, general purpose *nix server into a SOCKS5 server that listens for incoming connection on the pre-specified port. By default we use port 5555.
You can actually try to execute this command by hand:
sudo ssh -g -f -N -D 5555 1.2.3.4
Where 1.2.3.4 have to be replaced with your real external ip address.
Then you can check if your server is successfully listens for incoming connection on this port using the following command:
lsof -i :5555
If you don't see any output then it means that the server is not running.
If you see something like this:
user@air Data $ lsof -i :5555
COMMAND PID USER FD TYPE DEVICE SIZE/OFF NODE NAME
nc 1774 user 3u IPv4 0x1a5521d2af1cd5d7 0t0 TCP *:personal-agent (LISTEN)
Then it means that the server successfully waits for the clients of our SOCKS5 proxy.
The PID (process identification) is 1774.
You can kill by hand with this command:
$ sudo kill -9 1774
Then you have to check PID status with help of ps command:
ps ax | grep 1774
'top' command leads to the same purposes, monitoring of the processes. But you have to go through the whole table with the linux processes.
And it is not so convenient. That is why it is better use 'ps' command.
Actually the script automates all operations.
user@air socks $ ./socks.sh 
USAGE: ./socks.sh [ install | start | stop | status ]
You can perform a force install, later on to start the server, check its status and later on stop your server.
But if you just exit from the console, the server will be still running on the background.
If you want to start the server and install it automatically, just run the following command:
./socks.sh start
Then you can check it's status:
./socks.sh status
And finally stop it:
./socks.sh stop
Your server address will be the following:
<your_external_ip>:<port>
It is what we call sockets in the networking world.
You have to use this socket as the address of the SOCKS5 proxy server.
SOCKS5 proxy can be configured in the browser or in the system settings. Please use the documentation for your operating system in order to get to know better how to configure SOCKS5 proxy in your environment.
When you configure your system or your browser and mention this fresh socket there - your connection will be encrypted and anonymous. Your real ip will be hidden, instead of this ip the destination server will see that ip address of your SOCKS5 proxy server.
That's it. As simple as that!
I wish you happy, secure and safe browsing!